=head1 NAME

Git::Repository::Tutorial - Control git from Perl using Git::Repository

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    use Git::Repository;

    # do cool stuff with Git, using the following advice

=head1 HOW-TO

A L<Git::Repository> object represents an actual Git repository,
against which you can I<run> commands.

=head2 Obtain a Git::Repository object from an existing repository

If your script is expected to run against a repository in the current
directory (like most Git commands), let L<Git::Repository> handle
the magic:

    $r = Git::Repository->new();

If the repository has a working copy (work tree):

    $r = Git::Repository->new( work_tree => $dir );

If the repository is a bare repository, or you prefer to provide
the F<.git> directory location:

    $r = Git::Repository->new( git_dir => $gitdir );

If the work tree and the git directory are in unrelated locations,
you can also provide both:

    $r = Git::Repository->new( work_tree => $dir, git_dir => $gitdir );

The constructor also accepts an option hash. The various options
are detailed in the manual page for L<Git::Repository::Command>.

=head2 Run any git command

Git commands can be run against an existing L<Git::Repository> object,
or against the class itself (in which case, git will try to deduce its
context from the current directory and the environment).

The pattern for running commands is always the same:

    $r->run( $command => @arguments, \%options );

The C<$command> and C<@arguments> are identical to those you'd pass to
the C<git> command-line tool. The options hash contains options, as
described in the manual page for L<Git::Repository::Command>.

=head2 Create a new repository

Sometime, you'll need to create the Git repository from scratch:

    # git version 1.6.5 and above
    Git::Repository->run( init => $dir );
    $r = Git::Repository->new( work_tree => $dir );

    # any older git requires the command to be run in the work tree,
    # so we use the cwd option
    Git::Repository->run( init => { cwd => $dir } );
    $r = Git::Repository->new( work_tree => $dir );

Note that the old C<create()> method is obsolete, warns and will be removed
in a future version.

=head2 Clone a repository

Cloning works the same way:

    Git::Repository->run( clone => $url => $dir );
    $r = Git::Repository->new( $dir );

=head2 Run a simple command

When you don't really care about the output of the command, just call
it:

    $r->run( add => '.' );
    $r->run( commit => '-m', 'my commit message' );

In case of an error or warning, L<Git::Repository> will C<croak()> or
C<carp()> appropriately.

=head2 Silence warnings for some Git commands

Some Git porcelain commands provide additional information on C<STDERR>.
One typical example is C<git checkout>:

    $ git checkout mybranch
    Switched to branch 'mybranch'

The C<run()> method of L<Git::Repository> treats all output on C<STDERR>
as a warning. Therefore, the following code:

    $r->run( checkout => 'mybranch' );

will output a warning like this one:

    Switched to branch 'mybranch' at myscript.pl line 10.

In such a case, you can use the C<quiet> option to silence the warning
for a single command:

    $r->run( checkout => 'mybranch', { quiet => 1 } );

To silence I<all> warnings, you can pass the C<quiet> option during the
creation of the original repository object:

    my $r = Git::Repository->new( { quiet => 1 } );

This is not recommended, as it might hide important information from you.

=head2 Process normal and error output

The C<run()> command doesn't capture C<STDERR>: it only warns (or dies)
if something was printed on it. To be able to actually capture error
output, C<command()> must be used.

    my $cmd = $r->command( @cmd );
    my @errput = $cmd->stderr->getlines();
    $cmd->close;

C<run()> also captures all output at once, which can lead to unnecessary
memory consumption when capturing the output of some really verbose
commands.

    my $cmd = $r->command( log => '--pretty=oneline', '--all' );
    my $log = $cmd->stdout;
    while (<$log>) {
        ...;
    }
    $cmd->close;

Of course, as soon as one starts reading and writing to an external
process' communication handles, a risk of blocking exists.
I<Caveat emptor>.

=head2 Provide input on standard input

Use the C<input> option:

    my $commit = $r->run( 'commit-tree', $tree, '-p', $parent,
        { input => $message } );

=head2 Change the environment of a command

Use the C<env> option:

    $r->run(
        'commit', '-m', 'log message',
        {   env => {
                GIT_COMMITTER_NAME  => 'Git::Repository',
                GIT_COMMITTER_EMAIL => 'book@cpan.org',
            },
        },
    );

See L<Git::Repository::Command> for other available options.

=head2 Process the output of B<git log>

When creating a tool that needs to process the output of B<git log>,
you should always define precisely the expected format using the
I<--pretty> option, and choose a format that is easy to parse.

Assuming B<git log> will output the default format will eventually
lead to problems, for example when the user's git configuration defines
C<format.pretty> to be something else than the default of C<medium>.

See also L<Git::Repository::Plugin::Log> for adding to your
L<Git::Repository> objects a C<log()> method that will parse the log
output for you.

=head2 Process the output of B<git shortlog>

B<git shortlog> behaves differently when it detects it's not attached
to a terminal. In that case, it just tries to read some B<git log>
output from its standard input.

So this oneliner will hang, because B<git shortlog> is waiting for some
data from the program connected to its standard input (the oneliner):

    perl -MGit::Repository -le 'print scalar Git::Repository->run( shortlog => -5 )'

Whereas this one will "work" (as in "immediately return with no output"):

    perl -MGit::Repository -le 'print scalar Git::Repository->run( shortlog => -5, { input => "" } )'

So, you need to give B<git shortlog> I<some> input (from B<git log>):

    perl -MGit::Repository -le 'print scalar Git::Repository->run( shortlog => { input => scalar Git::Repository->run( log => -5 ) } )'

If the log output is large, you'll probably be better off with something
like the following:

    use Git::Repository;

    # start both git commands
    my $log = Git::Repository->command('log')->stdout;
    my $cmd = Git::Repository->command( shortlog => -ens );

    # feed one with the output of the other
    my $in = $cmd->stdin;
    print {$in} $_ while <$log>;
    close $in;

    # and do something with the output
    print $cmd->stdout->getlines;

=head2 Wrap git in a sudo call

If for a given repository you want to wrap all calls to git in a C<sudo>
call, you can use the C<git> option with an array ref:

    my $r = Git::Repository->new( { git => [qw( sudo -u nobody git )] } );

In this case, every call to git from C<$r> will actually call
C<sudo -u nobody git>.

=head2 Use submodules

Because L<Git::Repository> automatically sets the C<GIT_DIR> and
C<GIT_WORK_TREE> environment variables, some C<submodule> sub-commands
may fail. For example:

    $r->run( submodule => add => $repository => 'sub' );

will give the following error:

    error: pathspec 'sub' did not match any file(s) known to git.

To avoid this error, you should enforce the removal of the C<GIT_WORK_TREE>
variable from the environment in which the command is run:

    $r->run(
        submodule => add => $repository => 'sub',
        { env => { GIT_WORK_TREE => undef } }
    );

Note that L<System::Command> version 1.04 is required to be able to remove
variables from the environment.

=head2 Sort git versions

Basically, you need to recreate the C<cmp> operator for Git versions,
using the I<private> C<_version_gt()> method (which accepts two parameters):

    @sorted_versions = sort {
        Git::Repository::_version_gt( $a, $b )
            || -Git::Repository::_version_gt( $b, $a )
    } @versions;


=head2 Add specialized methods to your Git::Repository objects

Have a look at L<Git::Repository::Plugin> and L<Git::Repository::Plugin::Log>,
to learn how to add your own methods to L<Git::Repository>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Philippe Bruhat (BooK), C<< <book at cpan.org> >>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2010-2012 Philippe Bruhat (BooK), all rights reserved.

=head1 LICENSE

This documentation is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut

